look how much I love my son he doesn't
even have a penis anymore those women
online displaying themselves they're not
human you're a fool if you think that's
human and Jews you know they have IQs
that are probably 15 points higher than
the typical so they're radically over
over represented the there's no reason
to assume at all that the religious
Enterprise can't degenerate into
totalitarian psychopathy for that matter
does all the time is that
controversial
yes all right there is a Doomsday Clock
that we use to track how close we are to
nuclear Annihilation the closer to
midnight theoretically the higher the
risk if we had a Doomsday Clock for how
close we are to a totalitarian takeover
of the West how close to midnight would
it be it depends on what we decide to do
it the opportuni is there
at for a a pervasive totalitarian state
the likes of which we can hardly imagine
instituted with a rapidity we can hardly
conceive of that's there it's right
there in front of us so that's the eye
of soron by the way why well if you
dispense with God you create a Tower of
Babel and that was what was represented
in the Lord of the Rings as the Tower of
soron technological Tower and what was
on the top of it a big eye that could
see everything exactly
so if you don't have this is one way of
thinking about it if you forgo your
relationship with the omniscient that's
a good way of thinking about it you'll
create a technology that replicates that
for you except there'll be nothing about
it that will be your friend and it will
watch everything you do no matter how
hard you try to make yourself invisible
let's say with the ring of
power okay so I want to understand what
what is the proclivity in the human soul
that leads us back to this and let me
you a little bit of context and then uh
go into it so you introduced me to
Alexander nson I actually read the G
archipelago that sent me on a terrifying
journey of reading about every
totalitarian state that I could get my
hands on oh yeah uh ended up really
scaring me about how humans can break
bad in a way that I felt I was looking
around and seeing people trying to
gobble up power uh top down Authority a
sense of I know what's right and
therefore you should do what I say and
that even when it comes in the package
of oh I'm going to save you like M China
it's usually when the package it comes
in yeah and and yet kills 100 plus
million people so is it only darkness in
the human soul is it only Pride or is
there Spirit of Pride it's the eternal
spirit of Pride allied with deceit and
resentment and arrogant arrogance that's
the spirit that Milton characterized in
Paradise Lost is it is it only
human no clearly not it exists only
human what do you mean well it'll be
there long after you are it's Immortal
in a way that's a way of thinking about
it but it feels like it would propagate
only through the human mind what do you
mean
only that there is no other option I
mean we could get into AI but I want to
segment this out the the reason I want
to tease this apart is I believe that
people are possessed by ideas that if
they they allow themselves to become
possessed by ideas they invite them in
yeah even better people invite in ideas
those ideas are going to govern the
quality of their life and then as enough
of us agregate around good or bad ideas
the quality of Our Lives get better or
worse that's the war of
principalities so that's what that's
right that's right what I want people to
understand is uh Soldier nen's idea of
the line between good and evil runs to
the heart of every man uh we all have
this temptation towards totalitarianism
born of Pride uh especially smart people
so how do we avoid it
fear fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom well what is God then the
antithesis of the of the spirit of
totalitarian
Pride can I simplify that so well
imagine this okay sure sure imagine this
imagine that here's a form of hell um
owitz guard enjoying his job okay now I
think
it's it's fair to say that your
experience exposing yourself to such
things has convinced you that there's
such a thing as evil okay whatever is
farthest in the opposite direction
that's God what is
that well that's not a simple thing to
say I mean God is
ineffable God is the
ineffable spirit that unites
all that's a good way of thinking about
it so what does that mean well it means
an endless number of things right many
of which can't be formulated in
words much of which is directly
experienced embodied um imagined felt
motivated all of that not just words
it's certainly not something that can be
cap encapsulated in a in a set of
declarative statements which is partly
what the West is confused about we think
that belief in God
is adherence to a statable
description of God or a Creed that's not
what it is that's that's a very small
fragment of what it is just as our
verbal knowledge is a small fragment of
our
totality can I give you what I think
you're saying in my language and tell me
if I'm getting correct okay uh
everyone's going to be familiar with the
idea of The Madness of crowds and there
is something terrifying if you've ever
been around a group that goes from a
normal group and they snap over into
fighting or whatever you feel mob yeah
you feel a spirit overcome them where
they are linked and it changes something
in the way that they are processing the
inputs from their environment definitely
it changes their perceptual frame yes
changes their emotions it changes what
they see it changes what they're aiming
at even unconsciously it's no different
than the in some ways it's no different
than the spirit that unites a crowd when
it leaps to the to its feet
spontaneously after a particularly
brilliant goal right that's also a form
of possession although much more
positive form of possession because
that's a celebration of the ability to
hit the mark which is the opposite of
sin right sin means to miss the mark
there's three separate derivations of
the word sin that come from archery yeah
yeah so that's what people are doing in
the stadium is they're allowing
themselves to be possessed by the spirit
that hits the target
brilliantly right all together
collectively it's a form of worship
what's interesting in that uh so let's
put two pins in things so one the hell
is the exact opposite it's when the
crowd goes mad it breaks bad it kills it
smashes it breaks and then God is the
exact opposite of that it's expansive
joyful
uplifting and unifying right it has that
it has that yes it's the proper Unity
that's another way these are definitions
right they're not statements they're not
statements they're not descriptive
statements about God they're definitions
they're definitions that's a very very
different thing so imagine that there is
a spirit that properly unifies that's
that's the monotheistic God that's the
god of Abraham what is that well you
know who can
say no one can say we can tell stories
about it and of course the biblical
stories are stories about that that's
exactly what they are but the fastest
way and for modern people I would say is
the root you took if you don't don't
believe in good well try investigating
evil and see what you make of that and
then start to understand what that means
for you and see what that does to you is
one of the things I realized because I
started studying malevolence a very long
time ago now it's it's 50 years for me
it's a long time
and I certainly became convinced that in
some ways there was nothing more real
than malevolence now there are arguable
contenders pain for example is a
Contender but if malevolence is an
undeniable reality and there's a price
to be paid for denying that by the way
because you turn the Nazi catastrophe
into just a matter of opinion right if
you don't believe in something like the
Ultimate Reality of evil it's
just well you know the Nazis went about
things a slightly different way who's to
say what's right or wrong and while the
opposite of that there's an opposite of
that right it's what it's wherever you
go if you travel as far away from
enjoying owitz as you can possibly go
and people might say well no one enjoyed
owitz it's like really what was the sign
over owitz the joke work will make you
free people joke you tell me they didn't
didn't enjoy it slay if you think that
people didn't enjoy orwitz you know
nothing about human beings and nothing
about
yourself if you think you couldn't have
enjoyed it you know nothing about
yourself
and that's terrifying and should be and
that it can lead you you see that leads
you because it gives you something solid
to stand on something terrible terrible
and solid but nonetheless something
motivating because maybe you decide that
you don't want to go to hell so to speak
and maybe you don't want to bring
everyone you love along with you maybe
you don't even want to bring everyone
you hate along with you that's a good
realization better to redeem than to Dam
you changed my life with a simple idea
and that simple idea was that um I could
find myself as the guard in aitz and not
as the person hiding um and Frank in my
addict yeah oh five of them yeah exactly
and that scared me
saw Yes I mean God the thing it just
terrified me in Toronto it was something
remarkable to behold all these butter
won't melt in your mouth hyper moral
Canadians you know secure in the fact
that they're nothing for example like
the warmongering Americans to the south
delighting in the fact that they could
turn their neighbors over to the state
with a phone call willing to wear those
goddamned masks for the rest of their
life just to have the privilege of being
a state informant brutal
brutal awful so I look at that and I see
myself and I say okay the line between
which way I go on that runs through my
heart this is where I get obsessed with
the idea of okay I'm going to be
possessed by ideas which ideas do I want
to invite in that's why Christ says that
the kingdom of God is like a mustard
seed it takes root and grows inside you
like all ideas ideas are alive Richard
Dawkins figured this out although he
didn't take it to its logical conclusion
a living idea is a meme all ideas are
alive and what do I mean by that well
they're instantiated in your nervous
system like how are they not alive how
do they not have a perspective how do
they not have an aim a set of
motivations
um the desire to communicate even n n
said every Drive attempts to
philosophize in its own Spirit n knew
these things and then you do you you you
incorporate you take in you eat
sometimes things you shouldn't that's
the Eternal sin of mankind to
incorporate even the forbidden fruit
fruit what's the forbidden fruit
knowledge of Good and Evil what does
that mean you don't get to make the
moral rules and that's where Nicha went
wrong we don't we can't create our own
values we have to abide by the intrinsic
order of the cosmos and Richard Dawkins
knew this too he wrote a paper stating
that biological organisms had to be a
microcosm of the environment in which
they evolved it's like okay Dr Dawkins
how far are you willing to take them
that a human being is a personality does
that mean that the cosmos is a
personality is it something you have a
relationship with that's how we're
adapted so he can take that wherever
however he wants the the Avatar of the
spirit of Enlightenment
rationality right that that that's a
snake that's now devoured its own tail
so that's why the enlightenment is
coming to an end yes we are for sure
going to talk about that before we get
to that though I I really how did you
notice that I said
that uh you gave a speech I I I listen
to a lot of your stuff because you help
me think through complicated ideas uh I
am a big believer in that um by speaking
you're speaking so that you can
understand not necessarily so you can be
understood so I seek people that I see
have The Bravery to actually think out
loud and process through also for
anybody watching they will probably have
heard me talk about this before and I
was telling you this before we started
rolling I was very confused when you
went from the internet's dad you got
very sick and you came back as like the
internet's Theologian and I could not
figure out what that change was uh but
as somebody who I had seen be a very
careful thinker I thought okay what if
there were something here that I'm just
not understanding yet let me try to map
it and I don't know that you and I see
this the same way I don't know is the
honest answer and I hope we figure that
out today but I know that you have
Clarity of thought and there's internal
consistency and so that means that
there's probably something very useful
because you know what you're aiming
towards and this is the anchor we have
to address before we can move on away
from yes yes which to your point about
uh sin is missing the mark but that
implies that there is because I would
say sin is hitting the wrong Mark if I
had well that's that's a deeper form of
sin because that's what I think is
happening right now I really think
you're the Maring the coal mine what's
happening to you with them trying to
strip your license even though I do hate
the way you tweet I'm not going to lie
but I listen to that whole episode where
your friends were like Jordan please
stop I was literally in my house like
Jordan please anyway you get you should
have the right to beow come out
somewhere correct you should be a fully
fledged human being you should not have
to answer to us even though as people
who um have gotten so much value out of
the way that you think through problems
that's what we're responding to anyway
so the thing we have to get to is I
think sin is hitting the wrong mark I
think people are hitting that Mark in
Spades I think you've become the
lightning Pride that's why we worship
Pride well pride has always pride has
always been regarded as the ultimate sin
before we before we go down that path
let me let me string this whole idea
together uh you're the canary and the
coal mine because why would that be I
wonder uh because you won't shut up
about things that people who believe
because I take the stance the
totalitarians actually are trying to do
good some of them aren't but I think
that that makes it too easy to push them
away assume that they are just possessed
by the wrong idea and so they believe I
know what's best I I legitimately know
what's best for Humanity yeah but that's
the problem I get it bear with me and
you are who's the eye that knows just
out of curiosity uh in that
statement that's the question say I'm
saying I know how wrong that can go
those people are saying they they think
they have identified
the social structure that will lead to a
Utopia they identify their eye with the
spirit of totalitarianism that has
possessed them they haven't gotten that
far they may not even be smart enough to
get that far which is a whole another
thesis I have about the complexity of
ideas which I think is a big part of
what causes this problem is people
cannot think through these incredibly
complicated ideas so they need bumper
stickers you give them a bumper sticker
Parables o you're trying to make it
positive again will take a bumper
sticker long before they will take a
par more compc yes yes that's you know
what you know what slogan means yes no I
don't know what it means it's from it's
from the Welsh SLU gam it means
battlecry of the Dead why of the
dead because slogans are dead words and
they're like in brandished by they're
brandished by the army of the Dead that
would rather drag the living into the
pit than Prevail than allow the living
to prevail
battlecry of the dead it's the army of
the Dead speaking through the mouths of
people that use
slogans okay can I I'm going to
translate that yeah uh you said earlier
that you know how soier niton talked
about people who were possessed by an
ideology right and they their words
their words had no personal relationship
to them they were they were merely
mimicking an ideology all the Communists
said exactly the same thing there's
nothing alive about that if everyone is
saying exactly the same thing well
because and this is I suppose where the
left has something has has something
accurate perverted there's a diversity
and a Vitality an originality in In
Living speech that's not there in in the
land of cliche and slogan that's why you
can't listen to people like when I
listen to ideologues talk it's just
buzzing I can't even hear it my mind
goes elsewhere instantly there's nothing
about it that's compelling there's
nothing that's gripping they're not
testing the idea against
feedback there's multiple reasons for
because they're because the speech is an
indication that while they're speaking
they're not treading the golden path
what's the golden
path it's the path that grips attention
and is inspiring okay I have to say you
can give me space I need to say this
that's that's fine all right so uh I'm
not trying to speak elusively there's no
no I know I know you and I just use such
different language and I think it will
be very useful for people to hear the
same thing said in like a Rosetta Stone
Way yes definitely okay so I've heard
you talk about this a lot when you go
out and do your talks part of what makes
them so captivating is you are actually
taking a living idea that you were
trying to explore golden path it's not
rigid Dogma it is an idea you want to
find the truth of and so you go out in
front of a crowd to assess whether
they're taking it in what kind of like
silence perfect and so that idea is
living in as much as it is not rigid it
is not fossilized you want predetermined
it's not dogmatic right that's right
it's that's why it's not dead it's not
already formulated it's not a
corpse it's something alive that's
happening right then and there right
right and that's something that only
spontaneous speech can manage even even
books suffer from the lack of that now
books have their utility they in a book
when you write a book when you read a
book you can deeply investigate an idea
but it does risk a kind of death death
of the words on the page because they're
not as finely attuned to the demands of
the situation the specific situation as
a spontaneous speech can be when it's at
its highest because it's of the moment
that notion that you know um there's
that's the third person of the Trinity
right that spirit that possesses you
when you speak in an inspired manner
that's a and that's a symbolic
representation of the Living spirit of
of exploration in relationship to the
highest goal that's really what it is
and so you know you might say well what
what do you have to be aiming
at if if your goal is to speak in that
manner and the answer is well you have
to be doing your best for the best in
you and other people that has to be your
aim and then you have to speak truth in
so far as you're capable and will do the
trick and there's no difference between
that and the paraclete that Christ left
in the gospels behind behind after his
departure it's a reflection of the idea
of the holy spirit it's the baptismal
spirit it's the spirit of God that moves
upon the waters at the beginning of time
it's a it's the creative manifestation
of the structure that extracts habitable
order from chaos it's all of those
things in its living form that's why
it's inspiring why else would it be
inspiring
why else would it attract and
gleam right or have motive Force right I
mean the and and you can think of it
instinctually if you want it speaks
biologically those are words that speak
to the deepest core of your being
materially for that matter because
everything Stacks up if everything's
unified in the highest Place everything
Stacks up and and that is the case that
to me is the final test of an idea's
validity if it will stack and if it will
point you to things that are true that's
technically True by the way because one
of so the reason that you have five
senses is so that your orientation
occurs as a consequence of things that
are stacked when all five senses report
the same thing you have a reasonable
assurance that what you're seeing
corresponds sufficiently to reality so
you won't perish right now we that isn't
enough because then I'll take the
evidence of my senses and contrast it
with the evidence of of yours from your
slightly different perspective and then
we'll do that collectively we're doing a
lot of stacking in order to filter the
infinite sufficiently so that we can
model it well enough to move forward a
lot of stacking and that is there's a
technical branch of
psychometrics uh construct
theory that that psychologists have
developed to help distinguish between
Concepts that are real from Concepts
that aren't like the phenological
concepts for example that people used to
use to map the hypothetical functions of
the brain there was something in that
idea but they weren't real Concepts how
do you know if a concept is real well
you can measure it using multiple
different instruments at different times
and in different places and get the same
report something like that now more than
ever the ability to see through the
chaos of the traditional news media is
an absolute necessity bias narratives
selective reporting all of it obstruct
the kind of informed critical thinking
that all of us should be striving for
that's why I have to tell you about
ground news ground news compiles stories
from across the global political
Spectrum giving you every angle so you
get the full picture you can see a story
like the one here which has been covered
by more than
260 sources what I find really
interesting is that 36% of the sources
lean left 33% are in the center and 31%
lean right now these are based on
ratings from three Independent News
monitoring organizations and if you keep
scrolling you'll see every article about
that topic another cool feature is the
blind spot feed which shows you stories
that are disproportionately covered by
only one side of the political Spectrum
go to ground.
Newsom and sign up subscriptions start
at just $1 a month or you can get 40%
off unlimited access via the Vantage
subscription check out ground news and
stay informed form guys I am very
impressed by this service and I hope you
guys will give it a
shot right right right this is why the
case against you scares me this is
people with dead
ideas uh enslaving others with bumper
stickers slogans that they can hold on
to that makes them feel morally virtuous
but they not they simple they're simple
and morally virtuous yes it's a
viciously tempting combination right
correct one idea explains everything
plus once you brandish that idea all
your moral work is done mhm right very
very tempting that is definitely the
tempting that is definitely the
temptation of a deadly slogan like from
each according to his ability to each
according to his need you can destroy
the world with that dead weapon yeah and
we you know we did a pretty good job of
trying that and we're not done
apparently yeah so uh this is why I
think you have to be from their lens you
have to be silenced because you force
that idea to compete for validity in the
realm of ideas and if it really is ideas
and that's all we have if it doesn't
compete in the realm of ideas it will
compete in the realm of Flesh yes right
everyone needs to know that and its
unwillingness to compete in the realm of
ideas is a signal that it's not valid
which is why they can't put this is
exactly why Biden saying I'm not going
to debate scares the life out of me
because that's what you do when you
can't win like if you know your ideas
are more compelling you step to the mic
all day long or if you know that you
should subject them to debate so if
you're wrong you could learn even
because maybe that's even what you want
in a leader you don't necessarily need a
leader who's right because God help you
you're not going to find that but you
could at least find one who is willing
to put his ideas to the test to discover
where he's wrong that's a leader that's
someone with courage right that's
someone willing to kill the to kill the
father in a sense to kill the tyrannical
father because the tyrannical father is
the presumption of your own dead ideas
that not psychologically speaking that's
the case that's the giant that the hero
slays in order to make the new world
right the dogma of the past the dead
dogma of the past it might have even
been valid at some point but you want a
leader who embodies that spirit and not
necessarily the correct knowledge you
know P Jean P the developmental
psychologist he knew this is
that the deepest truth is a proper
formulation of the process by which
truth itself is
generated right and that's what P was
trying to discover when he evaluated
children he knew that again the
deepest I don't know if I can say that
again the deepest truth is the
representation of the process by which
truth itself is generated that's the
hero story
wow it's a process truth is a process
truth is a spirit rather than a set of
dead facts why do people run from it
because it forces you to pick up your
cross I mean I mean really obviously
obviously like why do people run is the
question well what do they run from Pain
and malevolence well why
well it's obvious why that what's not
obvious is how you could not do that
well you know the the entire biblical
Corpus is an analysis of why you
shouldn't run what would mean not to run
what it would mean if you
fully
ceased running that's the story of
Christ the story of Christ is the story
of a man the man let's say who ceased
running that's what it that's what the
story is can I give you an alternate
take that scares me so badly and I think
I'm right about this okay I think well
if it scares you that's a good
indication that you might be right yeah
uh the big problem here is that to pick
up a cross and be willing to suffer what
Jesus suffered you have to you have to
have a conviction that you're right that
hell awaits on the other side of not
doing that most people cannot think
through ideas that complicated and be
certain enough that they'd be willing to
be torn down
well that's reflected to some degree
that's reflected to some degree in the
structure of especially the Catholic
church and and and doeski pointed to
that in the brothers
kurasov there's a scene in the brothers
karamazov where Christ comes back to
Earth in the midst of the Spanish
Inquisition and and he performs his
miracles and goes about goes about his
spiritual business goes about being the
process of the word and The Inquisitor
comes and arrests him and throws him in
prison and then comes down in the middle
of the night and says look you know
we've we don't need you around you're a
lot of trouble we've taken your
impossible message your impossible
demands and we recast them so that
flawed people can manage and the last
thing we need is you to show back up and
destroy everything we've done to make
what you had to say palatable because
people just can't manage it it's too
much and Christ listens and at the end
he kisses The Inquisitor who turns white
and leaves and but he leaves the door
open when he leaves and and that's
that's a complicated answer to your
question but you are right in a sense
that it's too much to ask but you're
wrong and that people turn to lesser
Solutions mediated
Solutions like a belief in an external
Christ let's say that's that's one way
of thinking about it rather than a joint
belief in an internal and external
Christ which would be more
comprehensive and they turn to that
instead of
of seeking out the whole Adventure the
problem with that is and this is the
problem is that you don't have have a
choice about your cross exactly you only
have a choice about how you will bear it
because death and and hell are coming
for you and that's that there's no
escape from that and so all you can
choose is the manner in which you
confront it and you can do it
voluntarily
wholeheartedly in good faith with
courage or you can do it any of the
insane multiplicity of other ways that
clamor for your
attention that's right my name is Legion
right there's a word there's a reason
for
that right so so the the Christian
message fundamentally is that your best
bet All Things Considered truly all
things considered is to take the whole
burden on like wide eyes wide open right
that's what Abraham does for example
when he goes on his great adventure it's
the it's a and that's what job does
there are precursors to this idea in the
Old Testament stories it's in some ways
fully revealed that's a good way of
thinking about it in the New Testament
stories so Christ's claim is that he
embodies the spirit in the Old Testament
you think that's
right I think that's the simplest
explanation and it has to do you said
already that people can allow ideas to
possess them so what idea should you
allow to possess you well the insistence
in the judeo-christian tradition is that
you should invite in this the spirit of
your ancestors the unified monotheistic
creative loving kind truthful Spirit of
your ancestors something's coming in or
a multitude of things how about a
diversity of things how about a rainbow
of things or a plurality of things what
under some United flag the union of
diversity
I don't think so it's no wonder that we
believe in the union of diversity when
we believe that a man can be a
woman if we believe those things there's
nothing we won't swallow no camel too
big to go down our throats no
totalitarian lie we won't rush to
embody so you asked earlier where are we
headed like every single person is
making up their mind about that well
they always have but it's really evident
at the moment and it's going to become a
lot more than it is because people are
moving in the wrong direction no they've
always done that but not this fast
interesting right because we're you know
we're we're we're in a we're in a
runaway cycle of of transformation and
yeah I think we're in a positive
feedback loop where social media allows
simplistic ideas to we in a lot of
positive feedback loops yeah it uh I I
the Only Solution I see is that's the
dragon that needs it own tail the
positive feedback Loop H we interpret
the orob boros differently well it's
many things you know because it is a
symbol of chaos but one of the things it
is is a runaway positive feedback loop
interesting I see that as um the what
ends up happening when you don't have
the right foundational model that you
can't make progress because your core
Foundation is such that you eat your own
progress yeah through incompetence is
the easiest way to think of it you have
the wrong model that's to me what the or
boros is about which is the whole idea
that you're saying that's why emerges
when the father
dies you know better yeah if the if the
father is a corpse the Urus makes itself
manifest the Mesopotamians knew this
when when the okay so the Mesopotamian
Gods killed their father absu and tried
to live on his corpse well that's what
we're doing when we mouth slogans we're
trying to live on the corpse of the past
and in instead of embodying its Living
spirit they try they slay the past
they're they have no regard for the past
which is also what we're doing by the
way they slay the past and attempt to
inhabit its corpse like jepetto in the
whale it's the same idea and Tiamat
shows back up she's the dragon of chaos
and she and her goal is to destroy
everything and that's one of the
precursors that idea is one of the
precursors to the flood myth and the
word TI
is they say etymologically cognate with
the word toou vaboh and that's the chaos
out of which God makes order at the
beginning of time all these ideas are
linked so if you inhabit dead ideas you
will bring back
chaos of course the dead yes the dead
ideas can no longer they can no longer
sustain you in
your active contending with the present
this happens in The Lion King what
happens when SC scar Takes Over The
Pride what what happens when Scar takes
over Pride Rock Pride Rock it's so
comical scar takes over Pride Rock well
why well he's scarred that's the first
thing he's intellectually arrogant
obviously and the whole Kingdom turns
into a wasteland a dry sterile desert
Wasteland that's always the case it's
always been the case and and we're
seeing the archetypal outlines more
clearly now because things are changing
at a
ever accelerating rate and so God only
knows what does Jonathan Paso say Giants
will walk the earth once again they
already
are what is The Enlightenment why do we
have to get to the other side of it or
why do you think maybe we already are
the enlightenment is the belief that the
material world speaks for
itself and it's not true you have to see
facts through a lens of value the
postmodernists got that right that's why
we are in the culture world to some
degree is the postmodern critique was
correct we see the world through a story
and the facts now indicate that I've
I've talked with Carl friston for
example one of the world's great
neuroscientists many people know this
now um I asked friston is a is an object
a micron narrative he said yes so we
have to understand what to do with it
function you bet you bet you bet you bet
you don't just see the world you see the
value of the world and you don't you
don't see the world and infer the value
you see the value you see the value and
and the the implicit structure of your
incons unconscious is the is the Matrix
of value through which the world reveals
itself and properly formulated that
Matrix has
a
multi-dimensional narrative structure
that's coherent that's reflected in the
structure of the biblical stories and we
know that what we say well what's the
foundational document of Western
Civilization well obviously it's the
Bible like forget the theology
historically well what does that mean
well it means
that it means it's the seed from which
your perceptual Matrix grew you're a
more or less coherent echo of the
biblical
Corpus that's what you are and the more
you know of the stories the hyperlink
Stories the more fully fleshed that
Incarnation internal Incarnation
becomes the Bible was written in consort
you might say with the obviously with
the function of the human nervous system
both individually and collectively was
woven together over thousands of years
and also evolved to match the structure
of our memories all of that and the
structure of our
attention so the postmodernists when
they realized that we saw the world
through a story which was a brilliant
Discovery and was made in many
disciplines at the same time by the way
um they jumped to the they jumped to the
next question which was well if we see
the world through a story what is the
story and they said well it's power and
it's twin sister it's evil twin sister
Hedonism but Power they were marxists
it's all about power power have it your
way play with fire see what happens
power you think power is interesting too
because you might say well why would you
want Power like if I could just ask you
to walk along with me why wouldn't I do
that why would I have to exercise power
over you well how about I want you to do
something that you don't want to do well
what how about something for my
immediate gratification that's why pajo
Jonathan Paso has said that the Marquee
dad is the evil brother of the
Enlightenment rational mind it's like
absolutely same thing same idea explored
by dovi in in crime and punishment with
risol
nikov yeah
brutal all right so let me say uh if I'm
understanding you correctly that to get
on the counter Enlightenment trrain we
could sum it up in a tongue-and-cheek
way and say facts are dead facts are
always dead
facts are always dead that's why you
can't follow them there's as many
there's more facts than there are
things you can't Orient yourself imagine
I drop you in the middle of a desert
it's like all the facts are at hand man
you're still going to die why cu the cuz
the territory isn't the map because the
land doesn't speak how about that how
about all of that
right now can I give me my favorite
example of this sure okay this is true
uh what we think of as the entire world
everything that we can see is
0.35% of the available electromagnetic
spectrum right right good example so
looking at you I should see a number of
photons in a given wavelength that are
reflecting off of that fabric but I
don't I see black I see red I see gold
whatever you see tools and obstacles uh
yes for sure and once I understood oh my
God I'm seeing a ridiculous ly gross
simplification of what is really in the
world then I realize my brain is made up
of algorithms and once I realize my
brain is made of algorithms and
algorithms are designed to push you to
see certain things to conceive of them
in a certain way I suddenly really
wanted to understand what are my
algorithms driving me to do and every
idea for sure that's why Yung said every
person has to figure out the myth that
they're living whoa wow it's the same
thing what story here's two ways of
thinking about it what story are you
acting out
or what character resides in you that's
another way of thinking about it or what
Spirit have you allowed to possess you
or what Spirit have you invited in and
consorted with so such that it can
possess you so when Cain is bitter Cain
from Cain and Abel Cain is bitter
because his sacrifices go unrewarded so
he's bitter because his work is not
successful and everyone should be able
to identify with that there's no
difference between work and Sacrifice by
the way they're the same thing we when
we work we sacrifice the present to the
Future saw that clip from your book yeah
okay okay so now Cain's work is
unsuccessful so he gets bitter and
so and he's jealous as well of Abel who
sacrifices are accepted and who's
thriving and so Cain Cain's countenance
Falls he becomes depressed and anxious
and nihilistic and resentful
and starts to shake his F fist at God he
did he does what job's wife tells job to
do when job is being tortured job's wife
says shake your fist at God and die well
Cain shakes his fist at God and kills
and so that's that's even worse um so
Cain calls out God just like bitter
atheists do constantly and for they have
their reasons and says you know I'm what
the hell's going on here what kind of
world did you make where I'm breaking
myself in half with my labors and
nothing is succeeding and everything is
bitter and pointless and God says if you
did well you you'd be accepted and then
he says something much much worse which
you figured out
already he said sin crouches at your
door like a sexually aroused predatory
animal and you've invited it in to have
its way with you that's dark right well
it's terrible it's terrible and there's
Echoes of this in other mythological
stories uh so what it means is that Cain
is suffering and there's there's nothing
sinful in that as such right because the
innocent can suffer Cain suffers and
then he turns in the direction of
Temptation he starts to nurse his
resentment that's
another biological metaphor to nurse
your resentment he starts to brood over
his resentment right and so what that
means is that Spirit of arrogant
resentment takes he invites it in it
takes up residence within him but then
he engages in
Creative he engages in a creative
dialogue with that spirit it's it's not
merely possession it's it's joint cons
it's conspiracy it's conspiracy between
the eternal spirit of Darkness that's a
good way of thinking about it and a
living human soul that's what happens
when you get resentful man when I hear
you talk this is uh this is is exactly
what it feels like to me um JK Rawling
the first Harry Potter book is really
simple and by the last one it's heavy
and she was clearly maturing the writing
and the story with the people reading it
m when I look at we who yes when I look
at we who wrestle with God as the more
mature next step in the 12 rules of Life
uh you sort of return to maps of meaning
interesting so you don't feel that it's
the successor to 12 rules of
life it is in the way that you just
described because I think I suppose it's
a hybrid see maps of meaning was so
difficult it's it it took me 30 years to
unpack it to the point where I could
make it straightforwardly comprehensible
especially in writing but even in in
lecturing right I I unpacked it really
over 30 years then I got good enough at
that so I could write a book that was
accessible and then this book is I hope
it retains its accessibility but it's
it's a hydrogen bomb this book really I
mean look I haven't read it yet but I'm
going to I'm going to plant a flag here
and say this is how I think your books
go uh maps of meaning which is how I
found you um helped me understand why
why were you motivated to plow through
that because I'm a filmmaker at
my so the story part yes and so I took
away from that this is why these
structures these character these
relationships this is why they resonate
with the human animal yes right 12 rules
for life were hey I see you suffering I
see nobody's talking to you let me give
you some simple rules that will really
help you out then you go on your own
cross carrying Journey coma illness
crazy town and you come back with the
Deathly Hallows version of now I'm going
to give you these the mythology and I'm
going to tell you exact ly what you
wrestle with to learn what Spirit not
only lives inside you currently What
Spirit should live inside of you all of
the human experiences already been
thought through I can't give it to you
in a bunch of simple packages of the
rules for life because those will become
dead wood fast I've got to get you into
the thing there's a reason you titled
this book we who wrestle with God and
not what you can learn from God that
that would have been a title more people
would have understood but there's
obviously something to this idea of
wrestling with living ideas making it
personal figuring out what your
relationship is with this stuff when
when when when when Jacob is wrestling
with God that's
worship that's that's true worship
that's why he he's awarded the name
Israel he's the leader of the chosen
people because he wrestles with
God
so that
uh Mana for the
suffering because it means that if
you're genuinely suffering then you're
God's there in your
grasp right there with you that's a good
way of thinking about it in the
wrestling
um Socrates was a
wrestler
literally right
and he was he was a very powerfully
built person he wrestled before he was a
philosopher it's the same thing and
everyone thing is about the Chosen
People Israel everyone wrestles with
God now the question is you know in what
Spirit should you wrestle with God and I
would say
um remember who you're wrestling with
that's what job that's what God tells
job when he reminds him
that you know God was there at the
beginning of the time beginning of time
um defeating Leviathan fashioning the
world remember who you're wrestling with
with have a little
humility or a
lot plenty enough to strip you of your
Deadwood right and if you're all
Deadwood then the fire of God looks like
hell can I get you to read something
that you said these are your words
verbatim this is from your Arc speech
this was when I felt like okay I
actually really understand what he's
doing now uh it starts there with the
muscle emojis uh and just goes to the
read it out loud yeah I think it's
better in your voice because this this
for everybody listening this is part of
the speech he gave at the ark
conference we're so
foolish we regard those
propositions religious propositions is
something approximating primitive
superstitions when in fact they're the
most brilliant intuitions into the
fundamental structure of reality that
have ever been offered we predicated our
civilization on those price positions
and look at it it's not so bad we've
brought wealth and plenty to billions of
people around the world we've been
struggling uphill properly and if we
were wise and faithful and courageous
and responsible we could continue to
spread that to everyone we could
eradicate absolute poverty we could
bring about a time of abundance and
opportunity for
everyone and we'll do that we can do
that if we Hoist the world on our
individual shoulders and operate
collectively in this harmonious Manner
and continue the struggle uphill toward
the city of God and that's the truth
it's the truth it's not some
Superstition it's not some primitive
defense against death anxiety it's not
the opiate of the
people it's the call to Divine
responsibility and to the degree that
each of us acted it out in the confines
of our own life we do what I suggested
at the beginning of this conference
which is tilt the world toward heaven
and away from
hell yeah that's that's all
right amazing it hit me very hard when I
first heard it I don't believe in God
how do I come to what does p say about
that when people say that he says I
don't believe in the same God you don't
believe
in do you think
are you struggling to find your way yes
is it an honest struggle yes that's the
belief it's not a statement religious
belief is not a statement about facts
it's not a scientific theory this is why
the enlightenment is is done that that
was wrong that isn't what it is it's a
struggle it's the moral struggle or you
could say maybe more clearly
see you say you don't believe but what
you mean is you can't reconcile your
conceptions with your intuitions really
and that is the modern predicament
because you do you believe that what
happened in orwitz was wrong yes okay
well then you know you've established
one pole of the of the belief in
Divinity you've just established the
malevolent poll and that means the
benevolent poll
is
ill conceptualized still implicit that's
it still implicit that's what God is
that's what God is in in the belly of
the whale is implicit still implicit but
that doesn't mean it's not there called
or not called God is there that was Carl
Yung The Carving over his the castle he
built with his own two
hands it's there you just don't know it
but you know to some degree because
you're struggling and you're struggling
away from owitz let's say that's good
great you know the person running away
from hell is also running towards heaven
now maybe your pathway would be a little
straighter if you knew a little bit more
about heaven but away way is
something out of hell is something out
of hell towards what there's the next
question I suppose Out of Hell towards
what towards what toward toward a
neutral a neutral normality or or upward
away from hell up Jacob's Ladder towards
the highest possible
Heights that's the dwelling place of the
eternally uniting Spirit that's a good
way of thinking about it that's Jacob's
Ladder and where does it end I don't
know if it does end it it disappears
into the
Heights and what's at the top something
that recedes when you approach
it I come at everything from a very
materialist
standpoint not everything I think
everything not the evil not your
realization of the reality of evil oh to
me that there's no in congruence there
that that's just a natur there was
necessarily an
incongruent um interesting so for me
that's the same I come at that just
humans are algorithms and you have
algorithms that could lead you to evil I
get why in certain circumstances in a
truly aoral Universe where are the
creators of algorithms as well yeah sort
of there's look yeah sort of that's
right biology is uh is at play but
females select who they sleep with and
that has huge implications we all get to
invite ideas into our world so for sure
um well there's an order it's like I
think one of the ways of thinking good
thinking about it is that it's the same
as the dynamic between musical knowledge
and musical production in composers like
the composers are adhering to a set
of guidelines you would say they're
they're they're operating in accordance
with a certain order but they can
produce an endless literally endless
proliferation of forms and human beings
are both of those things they're they're
the order that gives rise
to gives rise to what is new and alive
but they're also the thing that is alive
they're both at the same time that's the
hero in in in relationship to the the
father of the king that's Osiris in
relationship to Horus well that's Horus
sorry Horus the Egyptian god in
relationship to Osiris we're both that's
partly why there's a trinitarian view in
Christianity so because there's a
there's a the father is like a structure
that's a way of thinking about it and
the Sun
is the sun is the Incarnation of that
structure and the spirit is the
intermediary between the two it's
something like that I'm I'm trying to
get people to understand that they're
having a biological experience because I
want them to be able to predict the
outcome of their actions by
understanding the nature of their mind
and the minds of the people they're
interacting with I have a feeling you're
doing exactly the same thing through a
different form of encapsulated wisdom
that wisdom being the biblical Corpus
how right does that
feel well the monotheistic hypothesis is
that everything meets so I don't have
any problem with the evolutionary
biologist for example well that once we
sort out our theological presuppositions
and our biological presuppositions
they'll be the same thing yes oh yes you
can see that that that convergence is
already happening that's already
happening in many many ways there's
there's a tremendous concordance I would
say between the ethos that's laid out in
the biblical writings and uh the uh
what would you say the analysis of
reciprocal
altruism so and you know Brett Weinstein
is moving rapidly down that road for
example in his conceptualization of the
spirit that organizes human individuals
and and societies so do you think what
they're discovering is that the
narrative structure and the just time
tested way that these stories have been
passed on uh into our generation
um prove that that's just the best
encapsulation of that wisdom in a way
that people can use in their own lives
yeah well sure sure you could you could
almost think about that as by definition
I
mean the stories in the biblical Corpus
are the ones that burn themselves into
our imagination and memories well why
well because they have a concordance
with that structure the stories this is
where Dawkins would have gone with the
idea of meme if he would have pushed it
eventually the memes that best match
themselves to the structure of our
psyche are the ones we conserved yes
obviously how could it possibly be any
different how could it possibly be any
different than that obviously that's the
case that obviously assumes a base
assumption that you will react the most
strongly to the things that are most
true if you don't have that base
assumption you won't that won't be
obvious to you you''ll be like it's not
real therefore it's [__] and you
will completely discredit the emotional
response yes yes I because if you take a
Sam Harris or Rich that when you're
confused conceptually though too and
that can block your vision so and and
that's what's that's part of what
happened as a consequence of the
Enlightenment we we didn't understand
what we were doing and we didn't
understand the relationship between what
we were doing and the world of fact it
was super useful man well the
enlightenment absolutely absolutely why
did it break down why does it fall apart
because the world of facts doesn't speak
because the empirical hypothesis is
wrong will you give me that it's like
Newtonian physics versus einsteinian
physics where it's so close it gets you
so far but then ultimately it falls down
and you realize there's a whole universe
to be unlocked there there's an there's
a reasonable analogy there the the
problem is it's like the follow of the
science ideas that science isn't an
animating spirit it's not a guide and so
the world of facts see the empirical
hypothesis is that we derive all our
information from facts
it's it's not it's just not the case
that's not I'm going to change that word
for you and I think it will help you get
to what people are trying to say it's
utility that's utility that's value who
cares about facts it's utility what I'm
trying to get people to the American
pragmatists figured out in the late
1800s yes so but you were saying people
look at the world and they see they
don't see a water bottle they see I can
quench my thirst they see the utility so
someone I'm putting words in their mouth
and I don't know them well enough but
like if I were to sit down with Sam or
Dawkins I have a feeling where where
they Buck is I don't need the
encapsulation of wisdom in this story
that I've seen kill millions of people
throughout history when peoplee even
that's that's that's a very
see both Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins
identify the totalitarian spirit with
the religious spirit and that's a
failure of discrimination on their part
they're not the same thing the religious
spirit can be perverted by the
totalitarian spirit but that doesn't
make it identical to it that's exactly
what the postmodernists claim when they
talk about the it's exactly the same
claim that the postmodernists are making
about systemic racism is that the system
itself is nothing but an embod
embodiment of oppressive power it's
exactly what Harrison Dawkin say about
the religious domain it's precisely the
same claim and it's not true it's not
true when religious idation is perverted
it perverts in the direction of power
but the truly religious have known that
forever I mean Christ himself is
crucified by the people who use the
religious Enterprise as a means to power
that's the
Pharisees this is this isn't
new so now can can the religious
Enterprise be perverted by those in
power well obviously the most effective
Psychopaths use what is highest to serve
what is lowest but they will also
smuggle things into The Works that were
convenient and useful at the time to
justify Conquest whatever oh sure and
then that stays in the adance of that
philosophy that religion then do some
pretty horrible [__] like it's easy to
understand where Sam is coming from
especially with Islam when somebody does
a thing that we consider pretty heinous
and they point to the book and say I did
it because it says to do this in that
then yes well it requires it requires
particularly careful separation of the
the wheat from the chaff to get those
things straight yeah and is this why you
say we wrestle with God we're not just
taking every word of the Bible uh on its
face we are pulling from it you can't
you can't take every word on its face
it's not even technically possible
because the meaning of each word is
dependent
on well the word obviously but the
history of the word and then the history
of the word in so far as you've
encountered it and then the word in that
phrase and then the phrase in that
sentence and then the sentence in its
paragraph and then all of the
relationships between all of those
levels and all the other sentences and
paragraphs in the whole book like it's
not like you can point to the facts in
the
Bible I mean that just doesn't work
because the Bible's actually the
structure through which the reason it
doesn't work is because the biblical
Corpus is a representation of the
structure through which facts are
interpreted it's not the facts
themselves it's a deeper form of truth
it's a deeper form of Truth okay well
the truth through which truth is seen
okay um I I think what I hear you saying
is uh you need the narrative because the
narrative forces a hierarchical
structure to the facts that are being
discussed and without that even it gives
you a a framework with which to order
the facts you're trying to deal with so
that you don't have to reinvent that uh
sequencing of hierarchical
facts Alone by yourself well it also
gives you protection against The False
Consensus of the group whoa say that
again well look people might
say they might say well our knowledge is
only a social construct and then maybe
they mean Truth by consensus you know so
let's assume that there's a world of
facts that you can Orient yourself in
we'll just leave that as an assumption
for now and then we'll say well people
come to Truth by consensus it's okay
well what what what if the consensus is
the Nazi
consensus well then either that's a
transgression against a more fundamental
truth or it's just a variant of an
infinite number of equally valid
consensual truths well you can go down
that morally relativistic pit if you
want but that's a form of hell because
eventually The Logical culmination of
that mode of thinking is that there's no
value distinction between things in
which case you can't even move forward
because you only move forward towards
something better and so it just leaves
you bereft now the alternative is to say
well there is a central core of
hierarchical
Truth and that to some great degree
that's embedded in Tradition in which
case we can use tradition as the staff
the the the flag pole let's say like
Moses staff which is exactly what Moses
staff represents by the way that's the
tradition around which even our
consensus must
revolve right and that's the
conservative insistence that's one way
of thinking about it is
that there's a vertical axis of
orientation upward towards God mediated
by tradition and there's a horizontal
axis that it's that's part of the
ongoing conversation and consensus of
the moment but you got to ask yourself
and you already have asked this
question it's the question soltion it's
posed if everyone has gone insane if
everyone's possessed by the LIE well
first of all to make that claim is is
also to make the assumption that there's
some truth that's now being ignored but
then on what grounds does the man who is
honest stand because it's obviously not
on the grounds of consensus because the
consensus is the lie that's the nature
of a totalitarian state right when the
consensus becomes the lie you're in a
totalitarian state and that obviously
implies indicates more directly that
there's a truth there's a truth outside
of that now the truth is a process
rather than a statement of facts or even
a statement of faith you know and partly
because partly because of the of the
mode of Enlightenment thinking we think
even Christians think and probably
especially Protestants not that I'm
singling out the Protestants because
that wouldn't be fair that you know to
believe in Jesus is to say a set of
facts and then say you believe them like
they're a scientific theory well you're
missing the point which is what the
Orthodox Christians have been trying to
tell the Protestants for a very long
time and the Protestants know this to
some degree the point is the imitation
of Christ that's the ultimate expression
of Faith it's not proclam it can also be
proclamation of a set of beliefs but
that's not what it is fundamentally when
you say faith what do you mean faith
that it will
work Faith Is What You Bet Your Life
on uhhuh that's a definition I worry
that a lot of people bet their life on
that this is really true because then
they can just spout the bumper stickers
and they can shut the argum they're also
they're not just betting their life
they're betting their soul right that's
worse that that disappears with death
you know let me play with an idea here
really fast is it possible that part of
what makes religion so useful is that
even if you are uh trying to treat it
like a dead bumper sticker
slogan uh that the wisdom that it
encapsulates is so useful that even if
you were just
blindly doing it because God told you to
do that your life will be better than if
you were to um
not not well yes yes and I would also
say that even if you don't think so your
belief structure is permeated by the
implicit beliefs Dawkins believes in the
truth he believes in the redeeming power
of the truth mhm he believes in the
redeeming power of the communicated
truth well there's no difference between
that and worshiping the word the Divine
word it's the same thing and and if that
wasn't the case the scientific
Enterprise wouldn't have emerged out of
the Christian
ethos Dawkins though he doesn't know it
is mostly a Christian and so is Harris
now Harris has drifted off into
meditative space because he had to find
a God that was so ineffable that his
rational intellect could not tear it
down so that was Sam's solution but the
question is why would he worry about his
rational intellect tearing it down it's
only because I think and this is this is
one of the things I'm dealing with which
is if you ask me to believe that it is
scientifically true that everything in
the Bible is literally correct I'm done
Tapped Out finished no way uh a level of
absurdity that I I just can't even
entertain like I I couldn't look myself
in the eye and be like yeah I actually
believe it whereas if you say to me hey
this is the ultimate encapsulation of
wisdom so if tradition is experiments
that worked I forget who said that but I
think that's a lovely way to think of it
that's a good one uh if that's true and
this story is has encapsulated these in
a way that the human mind can absorb
through the narrative and that this is
just withstood the test of time that if
you blindly believe this and act in
accordance your life will actually be
made better you could say The Exodus
description is a very accurate
description of what actually happened
but all the people who were there at the
time were blinded by the facts blinded
by the facts
why do you say blinded by the facts well
how much you already said for example
that when you look you use some trifling
percentage of the available
electromagnetic spectrum well when you
are anywhere doing anything what
fraction of what's going on in reality
do you perceive well I would say the
biblical accounts of what happened are
more accurate than the accounts of the
people who would have than the accounts
we would have generated had we been
there
there the there are there are Glimpse
behind the scenes that's another way of
thinking about it I I don't want to
spiral off from this I want to know if
you think this is really true because
this may make your message acess
accessible to people like me as one
Avatar uh that it might not otherwise be
that the mistakes Sam is making is
approaching God which I will say is
encapsulated wisdom in a narrative that
you can pass it's the wisdom too even
that's even better okay so
if he's turning his rational mind to it
that is to lose the forest for the trees
because now he's attacking the container
and he's saying ah but the you told me
the container was made out of wood but
it's actually made out of plastic
whatever it's like does it matter like
you got the thing in the container and
the thing in the container is what works
now I'm going to say something really
inflammatory and then I will shut up and
let you respond uh I have a feeling that
a big part of why religion works is that
it is the thing that it at all levels of
intellect works it works for extremely
smart people and it works for really
dumb people yeah yeah definitely why
encapsulated that's that's you know
there's some real truth in that now
Dawkins response to that is that's the
most intellectually arrogant thing he's
ever heard but but well because you know
oh I see so it's good for stupid people
but not like for smart people like me
you know that's the position I'm saying
it's good for everybody I know I know I
know but his response I've heard him
respond to that sort of thing his
response is that's intellectually
arrogant but Dawkins believes that
Dawkins believes that people can easily
become scientists and they can't like
science Jesus I know lots of scientists
I know lots of people who call
themselves scientists not very many of
them are scientists scientists are as
rare as prophets they're rare now you
know you got people tinkering around the
edges and sometimes they you know move
things a trifle but someone genuinely
devoted to the truth in that sort of
monastic manner that requires total
commitment you know Dawkins is probably
one of those people you know he's
tangled up in his
own I don't I don't want to get you know
high on my horse here I like Richard
Dawkins and I and I learned a lot from
his writings and he got a lot right you
know I mean he is the last standing
Avatar of the rationalist spirit that's
a good way of thinking about it the
enlightenment spirit and in some ways
more power to him but his his view of
the religious Enterprise it's
biologically absurd like it's it's not a
functional view on from his own
perspective and I know that partly
because first of all he knows that a
biological organism has to be a
microcosm and second he came up with the
idea of meme the idea of meme is that
far from the idea of archetype yes it's
the same thing correct yeah well he just
he got to the meme part looked over the
edge thought W we're not going there
that's what people do that's what
psychologists always do for example when
they encounter you you have to explain
what's happening now with llms and how
they're finding the patterns and the
language because that that really made
me look at
theal Corpus in a new way absolutely
well I think that we'll be able to use
the LGE large language models where I'm
I've tongue and cheek established a new
scientific discipline with a former
student of mine uh Victor Swift who now
works with me and works on on large
language models which we've been playing
with a lot computational
epistemology so he's found a set of 10
words that functionally replace the
notion of God in the English language
Corpus what are the 10 words I don't
know all 10 of them to tell you the
truth but you know you can imagine so
imagine God is the shared variance of
words such as good true beautiful just
merciful interesting right right so then
imagine that God dies it's that Center
word disappears but the spirit embedded
in the cloud of Concepts well that the
cloud of Concepts around a given concept
is the archetype the center sorry the
central tendency of a cloud of related
Concepts is the archetype yeah that
makes we can map it we can map it now
with the large language WS yeah stunning
that's really important for people to
understand that that in
cracking at least mimicking human
intelligence in a way where we can't
distinguish the difference what you're
looking for are these
interconnected patterns well that's
exactly that's what the models do that's
how they're trained right is that
they're trained on conditional
probability essentially towards a goal
so you can tell a word let's say a
non-word like uh nant n NT nant that's a
uh it's nonword but it's not it's less
of a nonword than ZX QR well why well
because the statistical relationship
between the letters and the word ant are
more akin to English words than the
statistical relationships letter to
letter in the all consonant other
non-con all consonant non-word okay well
the large language models map the
statistical relationship not only
between letters but between words
adjacent words but then words two words
away words three words away two words
two two words away from two other words
like the whole map essentially right
right and so but they do that
statistically they do that
mathematically so that really what that
means now is that if these models
are programmed
honestly trained honestly a very
difficult thing to manage then we can
use statistics to evaluate the structure
the implicit structure of meaning and
that's what literary critics have been
doing forever and you know Harris when
he argued with me he said well you know
you're just that's just your
interpretation which meant of the
biblical text for example which turned
him instantly into a postmodernist right
there's an infinite number of
interpretations of any text and there's
no canonical order between them that's
the postmodernist claim the lack of meta
narrative let's say which means there's
no Union it means there's no
comprehensibility it means everything
fragments ultimately which is what they
wanted so they could dance in the runes
and pursue their own short-term
gratification right with power as their
as their as their hypothetical guardian
and guide terrible terrible these
interpretations aren't
arbitrary they're not arbitrary they're
coded into the language that's what
makes the language comp without that
coding their language would not be
comprehensible now the postmodernists
even knew this to some degree because
they knew so sir he was he wasn't a
postmodernist but he was a precursor he
knew that the meaning of a word was
coded in its relationship to other words
now it's more complex because it's the
same for phrases and sentences and
paragraphs in the entire structure has
that what would you say that Network
that Network nature right but none of
that's arbitrary and and here's why it's
not arbitrary this is so cool it's it's
not arbitrary partly because it has to
be comprehensible to you and to me and
to everyone else so that's a terrible
constraint right it's like it has to be
a game everyone can play so that's a
really wicked constraint one of those
multi-dimensional constraints we were
talking about earlier but there's more
to it I had a vision of this that this
week about how this and it's been
developing for years this idea so
imagine there's like a central pillar I
envisioned it as a pillar of fire we
sort of God at the base of that and then
there are stacked diss of manifestation
material imaginal no material behavioral
imaginal semantic right so the material
world has an implicit structure that's
captured in
imagination and so the world of images
is going to have the same networked
structure as the world of words that the
llms have modeled soon the llms will bu
a to model the world of images and soon
they'll be able to lay them on top of
one another and that's what we do
because our semantic representation
system is isomorphic with the underlying
imaginal system and that's isomorphic
with the behavioral system and that's
isomorphic with the material system and
so there and then the concordance
between those is the truth of the claim
right so if it's true it's true
semantically imaginatively behaviorally
and it's reflective of the structure of
the material world that's a tight set of
constraints there's nothing arbitrary
about that there's no the meaning is
only in the text that's the ultimate
claim of the disembodied rational
prideful intellect it's all in the words
it's like no no no yeah that that to me
is the punchline about what you're
calling the counter Enlightenment of uh
all of these patterns are present in the
biblical Corpus and that's how you
know right it's a refle that's exactly
right it's a it's well what the hell
else do you think we've been doing for
4,000 years than trying to map this
that's what we've been trying to do with
every tool at our disposal now and you
but you pointed to a further
constraint the representation has to be
made manifest in a form accessible to
everyone right right well is that going
to be in the form of complex scientific
theories no that's the domain of
Specialists obviously obviously
obviously and besides that even that
specialized knowledge you can't use that
to orient you in the world there's no
reason to assume that your you know
typical evolutionary biologist is any
wiser you know than your typical
plumber often far less at least the
plumber is constrained you know the
world of constraints that a plumber
operates in that's a pretty pretty
tangible world you're wrestling with the
essence of material reality that's for
sure we who wrestle with pipes yes
definitely definitely well and plumbers
you know I would say there's it's hard
to uh imagine a profession that has
contributed more to the world than
plumbers how often are you checking your
credit score afraid of identity theft or
account breaches we all use the internet
every single day for important things
like Personal Banking and remote work so
why not protect yourself with our
sponsor Aura Aura is an all-in-one cyber
security service that keeps you safe
online AA identifies data Brokers
exposing your info and submits opt out
requests on your behalf Ora also
monitors your credit tracks your
passwords for data breaches and secures
your online activity with VPN and anti
malware protection you can try Aura for
free for 2 weeks by clicking the link in
the description or scanning the QR
code
right so all right this this whole idea
I find utterly profound um I worry
though we're in a super weird moment you
are you're a canaran a coal mine for me
in terms of freedom of speech and the
Overton window what people are allowed
to say
um the the authoritarian game only works
if there's nobody there to challenge the
ideas you refuse to go away but you're
proving hard to kill but they have
certainly tried most people are very
easy to kill in the world of ideas they
can shut down their career make it
impossible for them to make money which
then makes other people just way too
afraid to speak I get it you know the
hell that awaits on being silent but
most people don't and honestly the Hell
Comes so slowly that most people are
like well this is just a little bit of
Hell by being silent a little bit more a
little bit more well it's deferred hell
yes exactly and well deferred hell is
deferred hell is eternal hell that's not
good it is I'd rather just have the hell
like now yes but you are very very rare
and so there's two things I want to see
if we can get to the other side of using
what the um counter Enlightenment is
going to teach us okay so one I I spend
a lot of my time absolutely freaked out
about the authoritarianism that I see
creeping in as somebody who grew up in
the 80s like this is just riplash raging
yeah it it's Insanity oh yeah and it
scares me because there people telling
me I can't 700 million ctvs in China
Jesus man yeah they have full gate
recognition right
lock down knives in people's houses
what that's really scary that that
freaks me out are Petty yeah right
that's what makes them tyrants right
there'll be nothing that you there'll be
no autonomy that's the like zero zero
autonomy because you know well and if if
you if you haven't done anything wrong
you you'll have nothing to worry about
it's like well good great find me
someone who hasn't done anything wrong
who has nothing to worry about you yeah
right so how do I heard at one point you
were spending like $90,000 a month
fighting everything that's coming at you
um that's crazy so how do people who
just absolutely cannot do that how do
they push
back substitute and substitute adventure
for
security okay security it's
like you're going to pursue security are
you you how's that going to work you're
you're going to die you're going to
encounter malevolence like you can you
can defer the the
encounter to some degree although not
very successfully there's no security
and and then the thing is that's the
thing that's so interesting to
understand is you don't want security
you're not an infant that's not what
you're after you're actually after
Adventure so where do you find your
adventure aim
up tell the truth and Adventure will
come your way and then that's so much
better than security that there's no
looking back it's so incredibly exciting
it's it's Uncharted Territory the thing
about the truth is that you don't know
what's going to happen when you utter it
you have to let go you know so if I
could come in here you know calculating
what I want from this interview figuring
out how it's going to increase my social
status or make me more money and I mean
if it does those things okay but that's
not the aim they a is to come in here
and have wrestling match and why because
I have faith in the outcome so what's
the faith the faith is whatever happens
to you when you tell the truth is the
best thing that could happen no matter
how it looks to
you that's a statement of faith now
there's an alternative statement which
is oh no no no I'll say something and
there'll be a consequence and I'll have
faith that that consequence is the
defining what would you say defining
feature of that utterance I said
something I got in trouble therefore I
shouldn't have said it it's like well
what if you get in trouble but like
three weeks later everything's way
better for you Christ like it's not like
there's any shortage of things like that
in life that's what work is work is I'm
going to do this thing now that's
difficult so that something better will
happen in the future well truth is like
truth is the ultimate investment in that
matter definitely that's why truth is
what stores up treasure in
heaven that's what that means and so so
how can
people how can people learn this try
telling the truth I I wrote a chapter
about this in one of my books that was
quite accessible it's like start by not
saying things you know to be a lie just
start with that play with it see what
happens
see what happens walk me through the
morning when that person does that I'll
talk to young men right now uh they say
what they think is true they get fired
from their job they go well then they
then they probably bid off more than
they could chew right the Eternal sin of
Adam to bite off more than he could chew
it's like you know if you don't know
what you're doing and you're in a
dangerous place maybe you know start on
your knees humbly carefully you know
don't go out there and brandish your new
truth and make yourself into an idiot
martyr so you can tell yourself that
you're the Messiah you know with one
utterance that's not wise you have to be
as wise as serpents right that's the
idea this isn't a game you have to you
have to do it with your eyes open you
know and if you pay attention you'll see
your opportunity you'll see you'll see
it'll make itself manifest to you you'll
see where there's a choice point where
you'll be conversing with someone and
you could take the easy route out that
you usually take or you could dare right
then and there and there's an excitement
about that and then you'll try it and
you know other person you know maybe
you're kind of a cringing milksop sort
of person and and so you're you're being
intimidated by one of your friends who's
actually a bully that you hate and you
decide at that moment that you're
finally going to say at least a fraction
of what you've been thinking and you
know it takes them back and then
actually likes you better and is 10%
less likely to bully you now you might
get punched too you know that's well hey
it's real like it's that's right this
this is this is real it's it's it's the
ultimate game I suppose the ultimate
game is what's real but but it's not
like there's not consequences one of the
the other thing you have to understand
and this is a good thing for young men
to understand
is you're going to pay one way or
another there's no way out of that so
choose your method method of payment
that's what you can do and and weirdly
enough if you choose the
proper God if you choose the proper
method of
payment the price you pay is is one you
would pay happily that's what that's why
see Abraham is called upon to sacrifice
his son for
example and in the service of God and he
says yes and then he doesn't have
to and that's right and it's the same we
know this even on our families a mother
who will sacrifice her child to the
world let the child go Foster that
child's Independence offer the child to
be broken by the world full-heartedly
we'll get that child back right the
child won't leave it's so interesting
because the child leaves but not really
right because that's the child who wants
to maintain a relationship with the
mother for the rest of the child's life
who wants that mother as a grandmother
and who wants her around and who will
return as much as is appropriate but no
more and so everything you give away
you'll get back if you give it away in
the right spirit and we know that even
on the reciprocal front you know I I
worked with many many professors and and
soci scientists but let's say as a
graduate student I had a great graduate
adviser Robert Peele who's still alive
and who I still work with that case in
point I loved working in Bob's lab
partly because he was insanely generous
with his ideas he just give them away
like there were professors who'd like
have an idea they' shelter the damn
thing it's like this is my idea and
someone's going to steal it it's like
first of all probably it's not your idea
second of all it's not that great anyway
so don't be so concerned there's not a
lot of people lining up to steal your
ideas and third it's not that easy to
steal ideas anyways so there's a fair
bit arrogance and and lack of faith in
that but imagine we could even imagine
psychophysiologically what happens to
you if you give away your ideas so let's
say you know you're blessed with a
creative spirit and and you're just giv
your ideas away like mad like like
you're a tree that's full of fruit and
you're just Distributing it well
everybody that you give an idea to is
thrilled about it and they reflect that
in their enthusiasm and that enthusiasm
is rewarding and that reward creates a
dopaminergic kick and that dopaminergic
kick reinforces the dominance of the
creative spirit and so then you have
more ideas right and so that's a great
example of how you get back what you
give away in Spades it's by far the best
strategy that's why Christ says that you
know if someone asks you for I don't
remember the this phrase exactly but you
know you give the person who asks your
coat you walk the mile with them you
give more than you're called upon to
give even to your enemies
why because there is no better strategy
than that by any stretch of the
imagination this is why there's such an
emphasis in the Old Testament on
Hospitality be welcome and in productive
generosity productive generosity what
what does that ensure it ensures your
own security weirdly enough because if
you give to a thousand people and then
you're in trouble you have a thousand
people who are ready to help you know
maybe you could give to a 100,00 people
or a million people I mean how could you
possibly put anything in a more solid
Bank than in the Goodwill you generated
in the embodied imaginations of other
people that's the kingdom that's the
that's the Tre that's Treasures in
Heaven and they are an eternal form of
treasure in some sense not least because
that reputation can last in some cases
throughout the ages and then it's it's
part of the manifestation of that
underlying Spirit of creative generosity
that gives rise to the cosmos
itself thing I don't want to get lost in
all of that is that that is somebody who
has a hierarchy of values whether they
got it religiously or they just decided
it but the hierarchy of values is what I
would tell people to lean on in times of
trouble yeah they can't have just
decided it if they decided it it's
because something moved within them
right because we just aren't
self-created you know you know what I
mean I mean we we have that
self-creative capacity to some degree
but we're the inheritors of one
tradition or another or mish mash of
traditions or we're socialized creatures
intensely socialized creatures so
there's all sorts of things that give
rise to impulses within us and so I
would say if some someone technically
atheistic is generous and productive in
spirit then they're infused with the
word regardless of what the semantic
system sitting on top has to say about
it's like I don't believe that it's like
well it kind of looks like you do you
know if we're going to judge the tree by
its fruits and so Dawkins you know
Dawkins doesn't know how much of a
Christian he is God I want to sit you
two down at the same time I want to hear
him respond to that statement he's a
he's a terrifying guy guy you know I I
unfortunately the few times I have
talked to him I'm still quite ill and um
you don't want to talk to Richard
Dawkins when you're not at your best and
so but I do believe that we are
scheduled to have a public discussion at
some point in the relatively near future
that would be amazing um going back to
young men there's an idea that you put
out there that I have talked about just
ad nauseum I'm so grateful to you for
this concept I hope you're right that in
the Bible the idea that the meek shall
inherit the earth makes no sense when
you think of Meek as weak but when you
think of Meek as somebody who
is a total badass but they keep their
sword sheathed Rogan's a good
example why what's meek about Rogan well
it's not that he's
weak it's
that he every guest he has he he tries
to learn from you know it's it it's a
kind
of there isn't anything more compelling
and powerful than a well-armed humility
and I've seen this in great people I've
met I have been privileged to meet many
great people and I've met the shells of
great people too but the great people
I've met are they're striking in their
humility striking it's a core part of
their character and they're
not they're wrestling all the time when
they talk to someone doesn't matter who
it is
they're they're there with them
communicating you know one of the things
we learned as we moved Along on this
tour was I have security people who also
help me with Logistics and
uh we've had to be very careful about
who we gather around us because all the
people on the tour have to treat
everyone they come into contact well
with well all everyone especially the
people who come to my shows but in
restaurants in hotels like I don't want
to leave uh this is especially true if
you're in the public eye because okay if
if you're unknown and you offend someone
they'll forget it but if you're
wellknown and you offend someone they
will never forget it it will burn itself
into their imagination and they will
tell absolutely everyone they they'll
feel deeply betrayed and and they have
been so so we ensure that everyone
around us treats everyone not well in
the manner that keeps reputation intact
but
well not so that reputation stays intact
but because it's the right thing to do
and that's a form of that meekness you
know it's it that's that's what it's
referring to do you think men are being
taught to be weak right now yes
definitely what oh no it's worse than
being
taught they're being enticed toward that
in every way tell me more and punished
for not doing it well they're enticed
towards it by well well the insistence
for example that there are modes
of less worthy being than the masculine
let's say because masculinity itself is
toxic to its core a manifestation of
patriarchal oppression that male
ambition is nothing but a manifestation
of the force of tyrannical power that
not only oppresses the oppressed but
rapes the world Jesus brutal so there's
that so that and then any deviation from
any deviation in that
direction the desire of a four-year-old
boy to play with guns for example well
we have to rub rub that out it's like oh
well do you you're going to rub out your
son's ability to point and shoot are you
that's that's what he'll do is his whole
life going to go to war with that in
your feminine virtue toxic masculinity
it's like great great Harpy Warfare it's
awful it's awful you know but it's it's
part of this belief and that's derived
from this Unholy Nexus of agreement
between the postmodernists and the metam
marxists that the only story is one of
power and Men wield the power and
therefore all masculine virtue is
identical to the striving for power and
that's immoral in its Essence it's
basically the most pathological
brandishes of that Doctrine presume that
male virtue is indistinguishable from
malevolence and so the best you can do
if you're a man is to castrate yourself
and oh god well what that's what's
happening in the
culture it's act literally happening
it's not even it's not even
symbolic that's that's the offering
that's the ultimate offering to the to
the great mother that's a great way
Freud knew this Yung knew this this is
well mapped out this is well mapped out
in the psychological and and symbolic
spheres you've asked a lot of people I
don't know if you've ever gotten a
satisfying answer I haven't heard it yet
but what happens when the left goes too
far or where yeah where does the left go
too far yeah yeah well it's Equity
clearly I POS that to it was either
Brett Weinstein or his wife Heather H
and cuz I said look what I see in the
world right now is what it looks like
when women become pathological that the
things that are good nurturing wanting
to care for people when that goes too
far and I devouring mother would be your
phrase but it's a perfect phrase um yeah
it really does sin of Eve that's the
Eternal sin of Eve to to even clasp the
serpent to her
breast my compassion is so overpowering
there's nothing it can't incorporate
even the fruit of the of evil
itself that's the fall of Man yeah
that's being playing out like in Spades
rapidly
miraculously yeah it's very very bad
very very
dark so I know that if we don't find a
way to um make men I would even say
strong I think strong is a part of it
but invite them invite them to be strong
invite them to be become what healthy
masculinity looks like now the question
becomes to from where I'm standing I
will give you the image that I use a lot
I use this in business all the time uh
when things are getting really hard I
imagine myself in a loin cloth covered
in the blood of my enemies with a big
[__] sword in my hand yeah and that
imagery helps me stay focused be strong
be hard when I need to be hard not that
I'm you know imagining killing
indiscriminately but that I need to be
able to step into aggression and
aggression is the right word and when I
um that's why Andrew Tate is so so
attractive to young men dude so much
he's utterly fascinating to me 90% of
what he says scares me to death because
it actually is toxic masculinity but 10%
is so good that I'm like you
cannot people are complicated a but the
thing is is that the the
more okay so so the perversion of
warrior in some ways is psychopath and
you know that because you watch like
mafia movies so we all know this okay
but but there's a dreadful attraction in
untrammeled aggression for men who are
so crushed that they're castrated that's
a good way of thinking about it so so
the attraction that the that the Andrew
Tate Persona let's say has on those
young men there's actually a lot of that
that's positive now that doesn't mean
that that's the right target
but
it there are creative ways of being
wrong that are helpful right right now I
you know you see better examples of that
precisely that in people like Joo
willink and David Goggins and Joe Rogan
like these are tough guys you know but
they're not they don't have the sex
appeal though that's one thing I'll give
Andrew Tate like partly because they
don't want it yeah you see yeah but it
isn't that they couldn't have it like
it's that they've they've decided that
everything in its proper place Rogan has
a family you know that's that's where
he's put it and and hey man good work
good work to him you know and that sex
appeal that Andrew Tate has that's the
sex appeal of the short-term Mater
that's the psychopathic sex appeal
that's the dark tetr sex appeal it's
shallow it's shallow and it will get him
in trouble I mean already got him in
trouble yeah and so that's not going to
unless he you know wises up precisely
that it'll get him in trouble you know
and I'm I'm not trying to take him apart
I mean I think what he did with his with
his capitalization on female sexuality
is absolutely
unforgivable but well I that's enough of
that I mean that was that was beyond the
pale in my estimation there was no
there's no excuse for that whatsoever
now you know if you're
a basement dwelling in Cel the mere fact
that you could imagine ever doing that
sort of like you imagining yourself you
know in a loin cloth covered with blood
the mere idea that a man which is what
you are could even imagine manage doing
that having a Harum you know of women
who are offering sexual favors at at
your beck and call that's a much higher
calling than castrated over obese
resentful loser who can't leave the
basement right cuz that's an even low I
suppose you know when you're in the
lowest rung of Hell the rung right above
looks like
heaven and and it it's up it's
up that aggression and that aggression
is very very necessary you know it's
it's very necessary and sports are a
great way of of of putting that in its
proper place especially team sports
because you you can take that
competitive Instinct and that instinct
to
win that instinct to
be competent more deeply and you can you
can put it in its proper place and it is
an immense source of
implacability immense now in a certainly
something I draw on when I lecture for
example like it's a source of energy
it's just sitting right
there interesting why is that so
effective anger aggression is a very
primordial Instinct very and and it it
activates both the positive emotion
systems which are forward mov moving and
the negative emotion systems that awaken
you it's high stress like there's
nothing more stressful than being angry
it's very psychophysiologically
demanding it's very
psychophysiologically stressful but also
in as a as a
alerting as a form of alerting arousal
in some ways it's unparalleled and and
it's great to have it at hand you you
don't want to rep see the Freudian model
with regard to aggression was repression
like we have this terrible ID that's
trying to make itself clamber upward you
know all red and tooth and Claw there's
some truth in that but his model of how
that was regulated by
socialization it was insufficient it's
not repression it's not inhibition now
he kind of knew that because he talked
about sublimation P Jean P had a much
better model much more much wiser and P
observed actual children a competitive
child who socialized integrated the
capacity for aggression into the game
and then he becomes the player every kid
wants on his team because he still wants
to win so he's he's got that forward
driving intensity and skill but but he
does that in a manner that brings
everyone along with them right and so
then it's not aggression isn't inhibited
it's integrated and and the more
aggression you can integrate well the
more compelling you are 100% like that's
that's the that's what that's what women
are after that's because the fundamental
I think the fundamental female hero
story is essentially Beauty and the
Beast and a woman is after a a civilized
Beast like literally that's that all
female pornography has that structure
civilized Beast you know and it can tilt
a little hard in the Beast Direction
when it gets a little masochistic and it
you know can turn a little hard in the
in the Civilized Direction when it's
kind of a like when it's a romance that
tilts more in the direction of
friendship Woody Ellen would probably be
a good example of that as a character in
his own movies but you know there's a
you can imagine that there's a range in
there where the solution can be offered
in a variety of different forms yeah I
think you were the one that pointed me
to a book that was utterly
transformational a billion Wicked
thoughts yeah yeah right what I find
really interesting is it isn't just a
civilized Beast it is a beast I civilize
with my magic HOA which is what they say
in the book right but that that I find
very interesting and has somehow become
probably did the same thing to men that
humans did to wolves that's [__]
Interesting
Man uh tell me more about that that is
really interes all you know you want a
wolf like that's trying to eat you or do
you want a wolf on your side well that's
the situation women are in I mean you've
seen the cartoon representations do Tex
Avery's cartoons from the 1940s I think
they were the 40s with the wolf
who's like completely
sexually what obsessed with Tex flying
out of his eyes yes and and he's always
after the singer who sings Old Wolfie
you know it's perfect it's perfect yeah
women definitely tame men obviously yes
clearly they probably tamed them by
offering them sex and fruit you know so
they were gatherers women are gatherers
they're not Hunters really makes me sad
that we can't that the uh public
discussion around this people get so
weird about so fast you actually did a
really amazing interview I think her
name was Dr Sarah Hill yeah yeah yeah
Sarah was good I found that utterly
fascinating talking about just what men
do to get women's attention the demands
that women make it yeah literally that
all everything and anything is the
answer to that 100% My Success is
literally tied to my desire to impress
my now wife then uh fiance when I really
turned it on I was like well I've got to
the correlation between male trappings
of socioeconomic success and male
reproductive success is like it's like 7
for women it's negative it's zero it's
lower than zero like men don't care at
all about
the wom men aren't looking for in women
for what women look for in men correct
so and not a bit even not a bit even and
and that plays out also in the structure
of female motivation you know men are
very competitive they'll and and in
unidimensional in some ways oneeyed you
might say right and there's an immense
symbolic level of web of associations
around that idea the oneeyed giant well
the penis is a oneeyed giant like
obviously right and it's it's a
seeking it's a it's part of a seeking
system seeking women and it'll do that
unidimensionally right and so and men
are like that Freud knew this the men
are like this from this cellular level
up and so they'll specialize they'll hyp
specialize
obsessively in a manner women are just
not interested in they can but they're
not interested in it and partly they're
not interested in it because that isn't
what doesn't attract men that that
capability you know the the men I work
with in big law firms for example
hyperco competitive men you know and
they were they're very concerned about
their bonus but not because they needed
the money
said well the money is just a way of
keeping score and they all said that
they all knew that they laughed about it
it's like they wanted a bigger bonus
than the next guy the amount didn't
matter the comparative amount mattered a
lot and it was it's part of a status
ranking you know and and that's
everything for young men status ranking
God yes I mean they'll they'll die for
that they'll kill for that like it's not
like we don't know this it's in the
criminology literature this is Crystal
Clear
know the gang a tremendous amount of
gang violence
is status competition but even more than
the even the economic element of that is
subordinate to the status competition so
yeah that's that's crystal clear crystal
clear so all right there's another idea
that I need to put this post or counter
enlightenment idea up
against uh what's going on in Hamas
Israel that
you've got two religions supposedly both
packaging up a ton of wisdom but when
they Collide it's ugly and it won't go
away is there a danger in trying to
communicate wisdom in a religious
package of course there's danger in
every in everything in every Endeavor
um the danger is the confusion of the
religious Enterprise with dogmatic
certainty fundamentally I mean there
there's no reason to assume at all that
the religious Enterprise can't
degenerate into totalitarian psychopathy
for that matter does all the time not
least because it's in the interest of
the totalitarian Psychopaths to hijack
the religious Enterprise now they do
that all the time that's their modus
operandi again that's the same people
that Christ is contending with
constantly in the gospels I mean at
multiple levels he contends with the
tyrants themselves from Rome but it's
not like there's no tyrants in the
Jewish community and all of those
tyrants use religion to be tyrannical
with and yeah it's the most egregious
sin or one of the most egregious sins so
the third commandment it depends on how
you count them but the third commandment
is generally held to indicate something
like do not use God's name in vain and
people think that means don't swear and
it kind of means that some trivial way
but mostly what it means
is do not claim Divine motivation for
self-serving Behavior that's what all
the protesters are doing we're so
compassionate in public it's like no I
don't think so I think you're
narcissistic Psychopaths fundamentally
and if you're not well at that moment
you're certainly possessed by that
Spirit look at how good we are that's
why Christ says in the gospels not to
let your left hand know what your right
hand is doing if you're going to be good
do it in secret why so you don't so you
don't fall prey to the temptation to
make your good subordinate to your
pride right that's what the bloody edle
mothers do all the time look how much I
love my
son yeah he doesn't even have a penis
anymore we solved that problem for him
wow yeah wow it's so bloody it's so
brutal it's so dark it's it's virtually
unimaginable it's such a pit it's so
awful and then the mother can parade
around with what what has she got her
son's genitals on a stick so she can
parade down the street oh absolutely and
show her neighbors look how
compassionate I am no matter what he
turns into I still love
him brutal would you say that or would
it be something more along the lines of
he is so loving and so compassionate for
having been at my breast that he has
essentially voluntarily discarded these
tox name that'd be her cover
story and you know the other part of
that secret desire is well immense
hatred for men immense immense hatred
for men for for or For What that
particular breed of woman thinks men
stand for and are so you know where
where does that come from if for comes
from all sorts of places lots of those
lots of women like that were terribly
damaged by Men by power Mad Men you know
who hurt them in all sorts of terrible
ways they lots of these people you know
you hear their story and you think well
it's no wonder you think that way but
that's that's no that's no excuse
because many people who are terribly
abused don't grow up to be abusers they
decide that they're going to take the
opposite route you know you can learn a
lot from being abused and one of the
things you can learn is not to do it so
what idea has possessed them that makes
them break bad when that horrific thing
happens to
them
I think you have to read my new book I
can't I can't I can't simp it's too
complicated to simplify see if I can
come up with some
reasonable I'm virtuous because I was
hurt that'd be that's part of it for
sure yeah and that's part of the if
you're a victim you're an infant and if
you're a infant victim then you're moral
and to be protected at all cost and
anything that threatens you as a
predator and there's nothing too
terrible for a predator right to meet
out to a predator which is another part
of the underground attraction for that
because this is the horror show of the
oppressor oppressed narrative once you
identify the oppressed and you identify
them with innocence you identify the
oppressor with predation or even worse
parasitical predation it's exactly what
Hitler did to the Jews 100% predatory
parasite what do you do with predatory
parasite
you burn them to the ground no holds bar
no no punishment is too extreme and then
well then you get owitz so brutal and
then you get to have all the Delights of
being the oswit owitz guard and then the
darkest part of your soul has the chance
to come out and
play is that what you think is going on
right now I was I was taken aback I did
not see it coming that uh there were Pro
Palestine marches on October 8th soe
Israel's response yeah yeah yeah that's
definitely what's happening I mean it's
very straightforward it's
algorithmic oppressor oppressed well how
do you know the oppressors they're
statistically over represented in
positions of authority and obviously by
definition then they're oppressors well
who's most statistically overrepresented
in positions of authority
Jews that's like the doors open man
so why are they the canary and the coal
mine why in a way that is so bizarre
throughout history part of the reason
it's part of it is the reason I just
said so then you might say well why are
they more likely to be successful well
they're smarter that's part of it by a
lot you mean at a truly biological level
they just as a group they have a higher
IQ yeah and they have neurological
problems that go along with that like is
that controversial or are people course
it
is but do people debate the fact stupid
people debate
it well I'm serious like the the the the
int the IQ literature has something in
it to appall everyone deeply I I
mastered that literature in like
19934 with a student of mine who I still
work with brilliant student he got
bounced right out of the whole academic
world because of the response to his
work partly on IQ well we were were
looking at
their class but if you go out to like IQ
145 where the serious action starts Jews
are way over represented and if you
don't like that theory well how about
they have a giant conspiracy to take
over the world as a substitute Theory so
I don't care which of those theories you
like it's like you're GNA both of them
are like fire both of those theories are
fire and so but you're stuck with one or
the other so that's life that's life you
know and so what what should happen is
that people should be bloody happy that
there's smart Jews around and the Jews
should be very careful not to take their
intellectual superiority as a marker of
what would you say excess intrinsic
worth not I'm not saying that they are
more prone to that than anyone else by
the way but it is a it is a Temptation
for intelligent people to identify with
their intelligence and to become
prideful right that's actually how in
some ways how God keeps the Eternal
scales of cosmic Justice balanced so
imagine you're born with an IQ of of
145 well then you might think well
that's not very fair because what about
the poor guy who's born with an IQ of 85
and those are very different they're
very very very very different and and
you say well that's completely unfair
it's like fair enough but the guy with
the IQ of 145 is is prone to The
Temptations of the pride of the
intellect and that is Lucifer right like
that's the worst Temptation and so
Lucifer is the spirit of intellect gone
most dreadfully wrong and so sure you
can have an IQ of 145 but man you better
uh you better be on your knees in
gratitude that that gift was given to
you and you better not misuse it because
if that thing takes the upper hand you
are in the hands of the worst possible
agent of Destruction and of course like
well no it's the intellect that goes
most dreadfully wrong that's not the
worst possible threat so obviously
that's the worst possible threat and and
so you know it says in the gospels that
if you've been given a lot you there'll
be a lot demanded of you and that goes
for intelligent people they better
develop some
humility a a a virtue that's sadly
lacking at the moment with our worship
of Pride let's say pride and Hedonism
Jesus brutal those two ideas in
particular you think grip people
today power pride and Hedonism yeah
that's a that's a yeah absolutely well
if you make your sexual identity
Paramount it's
like you've identified the eye with with
the impulse essentially with the whim
right because sex is a whim like
obviously now does it rule well what
what is it that you are if sex
rules you're the wolf that's for sure
that's for sure and a wolf to yourself
too so you know when you see this
ambivalence on the left because on the
one hand anything goes in all forms of
sexuality are to be like celebrated
worshiped essentially because
celebration and worship are the same
thing yet sex is so dangerous especially
between like members of a young
heterosexual pair that absolutely every
single bit of it has to be regulated
right to the last word it's like well
you Lous breeds tyranny that's why the
[__] of Babylon is on the great Scarlet
beast of the state at the end of
time tell me exactly what that means
when you break it down well imagine that
when masculinity degenerates the state
pathologizes the patriarchy pathologizes
well what happens to
females they pathologize too well where
do how do they pathologize in the
direction of disinhibited
sexuality
so
35% of internet traffic is
pornographic yeah but that's not driven
by women that's driven by men it's
driven by Bloody women too who parading
themselves absolutely inter it might be
like there's no shortage of electronic
pimps and desperate Engineers let's say
but that doesn't mean the women who
engage in that are Innocent by any
stretch of the imagination they're
they're uh they're doing the same thing
with their sexuality that that that the
that people granted the talent of
intelligence doe with their with their
with their gift look at me it's
like no no wrong wrong those women
online displaying themselves they're
succubi they're not human you're a fool
if you think that's human you're a fool
at minimum it's a machine human
hybrid a woman doesn't appear in a
Million places at the same time whatever
that is that's not a
woman yeah what do you make of the only
fans dynamic between men and women the
more I look at this the more I'm getting
freaked out there was a a woman named
you have to stop looking
that looking at it truly through a
research lens but uh Belle deline I
believe is her name uh back in 2020 she
sold 10 million pounds worth of her bath
water oh that's perfect
the hor of Babylon has a cup full of
liquid by the way in Gold a gold cup
full of liquid that she offers the world
really absolutely absolutely absolutely
look at how wonderful this is it's
actually what does it say in the Book of
Revelations it's filled with the filth
of her
Abominations God perfect so what is that
it's people wanting to consume that
thing they can't have that they have
idolized of course of course it's it
it's it's people wanting to consume the
thing that is denied to them because
they hid their light under a
bushel because they hid uh they hid who
they could become from themselves and
never pursued it sure and so they're not
attractive to themselves or anyone else
AB holy [__] okay so that's for sure oh
yes brutal brutal brutal You' got women
uh ascending to a position of
power that weird dynamic of
postmodernism
uh they've been given a gift of being
able to persuade men through their
beauty to do what they will to get the
attention that they want now as a
mechanical hybrid they're able to appear
in tens of thousands hundreds of
thousand millions of places sit on the
chests of men and take their Essence
from them and then men are hiding their
potential away from themselves because
they're punished for but that then that
gives them an excuse for not doing it
cuz they think well I'm going to the
young guys let's say who decide to be
useless you know some of its genuine
response to not being incouraged and to
being punished some of it is but some of
it it's pretty convenient it's like you
don't have to put your cross on your
shoulder it's like no one wants me to do
that anyways it's like well yeah that
that's always been the case and I mean
in some ways you know there's there's
new impediments
to striding forward confidently but
there's always being
impediments you it's so interesting so I
uh I train anybody that will
listen uh that you need to have beliefs
in your life and since facts are
overwhelming it's not about recognizing
what's true it's about recognizing
what's useful is how I think of it uh so
you have a set of beliefs you have a set
of values so you have hierarchy what
matters relationship to the right end
that's correct a th% which is why I
always lead with you have to have a goal
and that goal needs to be honorable so
you've got see the thing is that's where
your God
lies your God lies in the well your God
lies in the ineffable of in the
ineffable extent of what you regard as
useful so imagine that useful tilts in a
in a direction the sum total of all that
would of all that would be most properly
useful the essence of that that's the
god that's the implicit God yeah I'm
realizing I have built from the ground
up a system that is designed to do all
the things that religion does it's
really interesting this to me is it's
fascinating because whenever you
discover the same thing from multiple
different disciplines you can be pretty
sure you're converging on the truth
because everybody's just going what
actually works uh but the last thing the
last part of my cocktail is rules so you
need rules in your life basically there
need to be things that you don't do um
I'm that's good that's good that's
exactly right that's that's where're
cons so you can imagine the spirit of
God in the Old Testament makes himself
manifest in two forms
calling and conscience and conscience is
that what you just described it's like
the guard rails it's like you're going
off the path you know so there's fences
and warnings on the conscience side but
it's the same thing and it's the dynamic
between this is what happens in the
movie
Pinocchio so Pinocchio is called out
into the world his father is benevolent
a benevolent Creator that's jepetto he's
called out into the world to make
himself manifest to real I himself to
become real and there's two things that
attract him he wants to go out and learn
and have his Adventure that's the
calling and but that has to be alligned
with the conscience and the reason for
that is the calling alone gets him in
trouble like first of all it entices him
to becoming a narcissistic Psychopathic
manipulative actor that's when he's on
stage right then it entices him into
lying to get away with things and to get
what he wants so that's another
extension that manipulation
that it entices him to become neurotic
enough so that he can take a permanent
holiday then he goes to Pleasure Island
where he can engage in Hedonism that's
where the slavers are right and so he
needs that's what that's what just the
calling alone you know will take in
places that are attractive but not
appropriate you need a conscience along
for the ride and that's Jiminy Cricket
right and Jiminy Cricket is what bugs
you exactly yes and so that's one of the
places you can find your destiny is in
what bothers you there's going to be an
array of things that make themselves
manifest to you as callings of your
conscience those are problems those are
your problems why is that your problem
it's like well can you stop thinking
about it does it bug you all the time
well hey there you go that's your
destiny right where does this all go
you've got Canada has declined
economically you guys are now making 60%
of what Americans are making China we
can do worse than that with oh Jesus
let's hope not uh China is watching
everything everybody does they're Way
Beyond
1984 2024 in the US is uh it's
terrifying the election does it actually
build up the Civil War I don't know yep
UK you've got conflict Russia Ukraine
you've got conflict Israel uh you got
Farmers Europe yeah like where does this
go depends on how many of us shoulder
our crosses and walk
uphill I I really mean that like we're
at that
point wake up figure out which side
you're on if you were a betting man what
odds do you give
um US Civil War what odds do you give
World War
I well
we we're already in World War
II so I'd give that 100% how far will it
go depends on how stiff necked we
are right so the Egyptian Tyrant is
visited by is it 10 plagues the last
plague is the destruction of the future
itself that's the death of the firstborn
so you know it depends on how hard we
have to be hit before we wake up and
there's no end to that you know I mean
God destroys the whole world in a
flood you know that never happened it's
like how about about it's happening all
the time how about it's happened forever
it's happening now it will happen
forever how high does the water have to
rise till people
learn and what does it mean to learn
well this is why I'm a psychologist not
a politician or a theologian to whatever
degree I lay pretensions to that someone
concerned with spiritual matters let's
say
psychological
matters Redemption is a matter of
individual determination so that's why I
operate at the big level of the
individual how far will we have to go
depends on how many sins you decide to
continue
harboring how are you connected how is
that decision connected to the destiny
of the
world we all bear the world on our
shoulders how how can that be true
here's one way of thinking about
it how much better would the people
around you be if you were
better some
obviously what's the ultimate extent of
that what if you were everything you
could
be that's what you're called upon to be
you're called upon to be everything you
can be why not least because the try
getting through the world without doing
it then you'll end up in the position of
Cain you didn't offer your best you'll
be rejected by man woman and God and
yourself and then what then you're
bitter then you're fratricidal then
you're murderous then you're
genocidal then the flood comes or you
erect the Tower of
Babel it's always the same and now you
can see it like
it's just right
there why because it's happening so
fast this has been amazing Jordan where
can people follow you where can they get
your book well I just my book has just
been announced it won't be available
until November but you can pre-order it
and so any standard book selling site
has it available as of two days ago um
people can
come on and hear me talk about the
things we talked about today on my tour
I've got 48 cities left I'm going to
tour with my wife who speaks as well and
is getting very good at it I'm going to
tour with Jonathan pel for some of it
and with Constantine kissen so that'll
be very interesting and
uh then we're also launching Peterson
Academy in very short order and that's
our attempt to provide people people
with the highest quality possible
education genuine education in the
general Arts and Sciences domain at
approximately the undergraduate level to
as many people as we can possibly manage
at the in the most accessible possible
way that'll be launching very soon
um I've been working on an app with my
son called essay that teaches people how
to think and write and you need to know
that because you need to master the
verbal domain so that you're articulate
and competent and young men are never
told this there's why do you like rap
musicians because they're
articulate it's attractive there's
nothing more attractive than being
articulate so get your words in order
there guys and this essay app helps
teaches you how
to to ask the right questions to search
for the answers in the appropriate place
to examine the revelations that you're
granted to sort them out and to put
yourself together and
so we organize ourselves at the highest
level with words so words matter every
single word matters every single word
those are the fruits of the tree that
those are the fruits that the tree that
you most truly are has to offer that's a
good way of thinking about
it yeah
so
I love it that's the situation there it
is all right everybody if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care peace check out my intense
conversation with Patrick B David about
masculinity our men today week and if so
what can we do about it if you look at
data yes from 1960 till today our
population has increased around 90% but
in